I consider Alberto Cairo's book,
The Truthful Art to be required
reading for any data scientist.
In one book, he has managed to pack in
a plethora of references to experts in
the field while still distilling
down details into memorable lessons.
While we won't have an opportunity
to cover everything he talks about.
I want to talk in this lecture about the
foundation of the book in particular which
is a five part frame work for considering
the qualities of an information graphic.
Importantly, Cairo says that these
qualities are not independent of one
another and that they're interrelated.
So while I tend to be prone to
reductionism, keep in mind that
the different qualities interact with one
another as we go through the lecture.
The first quality of a good
visualization is that it's truthful.
Now Cairo admits that truth could
be considered subjective and
it's certainly on a continuum with some
things being more truthful than others.
And then it might be impossible
to establish an absolute truth.
But as data scientists,
he argues, we have two obligations
when it comes to protecting the truth.
First, we have to be honest with ourselves
when we clean and summarize data.
Are the activities we're engaging in
likely to obscure a message because
of the limitations that we've applied?
We should consider explicitly each
modification that we're making to
the data.
And make sure we are practicing
what he calls self deception.
Skepticism is an important skill for
data scientist.
And we often get so focus on looking for
patterns that we reduce or
present data in ways which are inauthentic
to the phenomena being described.
The second obligation is to our audience.
That is there are techniques and data
science and information visualization,
which we can use to shine light
on to specific pieces of data.
Indeed this is generally
the point of the fields.
But if we omitted the ability of the
reader to explore the phenomena more fully
this will generate doubt and
cast distrust.
Cairo gives us a great examples of this,
using a chart inspired by one put
out by the lobbying association.
The national cable and
telecommunications association.
This association lobbies on
behalf of US cable companies.
And provided a graphic which suggested
that, after regulations were relaxed,
cable companies invested four
times as much in the industry.
Now the original chart
has been taken down, but
Cairo provides an example
of what was visualized.
And we can see here, the title of
the chart alone, was intended to draw
the reader to the conclusion, less
regulation means more industry investment.
But there's some immediate
problems with this graphic.
First, it's unclear whether
the monies are adjusted for
inflation, which is a big issue when
providing charts of financial data.
Second, the time spans for
the two bars are different.
One covers a span of three years, while
the other covers a span of four years.
Think of this through the lens
of Tufts' Live Factor Analysis.
The bars have the same width, but
don't represent the same period of time.
This is a completely
unforgivable design choice.
And finally, there seems to be a bunch of
missing data from years 1997 and 1998.
And the chart stops in the year 2003,
but the information was tweeted in 2014.
What does a more honest
view of the data look like?
Well Cairo tracked this down,
and provided a line graph.
We can see that after regulation,
there were in fact years of
sustained industry investment.
We see a slight drop after deregulation,
then a massive spike in spending.
And then a significant fall
from the period post 2002,
much of which is excluded
from the original chart.
While it's unclear whether the dollar
values are in fact corrected for
inflation, seems pretty unreasonable
to suggest from this data alone
that regulations stems cable company
investment and infrastructure.
The lesson here is that,
while there's maybe no absolute truth,
there are ways of displaying data
which are more truthful than others.
The second quality of a visualization
to consider is whether it is
functional or not.
This again is continuum when we saw
an example previously with the slides on
data-ink-ratio provided
by Darkhorse Analytics.
If you expect your audience would
want to compare two data series.
Direct labeling of them is one
way to increase comprehension.
Well there are many heuristics for
increasing functionality,
I would like you to remember
the user test we did with.
I think now is an exciting time for
understating situated human behavior.
The web has dramatically increased
trainability to test social and
behavioral hypothesis that scale
across diverse populations.
And crowd power and mechanical
tuck are just two example of this.
Understanding how functional a given
approach to a visualization is doesn't
necessarily require expensive
ethnographic research.
It's now much easier to test
hypotheses directly with crowd sources.
The third quality of visualization, Cairo
shares is whether it is beautiful or not.
I think that this requires knowing
a great deal about your audience.
There are different perceptions based
on people's lived experiences and
aspects about themselves
such as gender and culture.
There's a lot to building a beautiful
information visualization experience,
which depends on situational and
contextual factors too.
For instance,
if you're building a chart for a report,
the colors and styles that you might
choose, even down the font choice,
might be more related to beauty than for
instance, function.
But the interplay of these elements is
something which is difficult to ignore.
I wonder is this broad topic of beauty one
of the conflationary factors of the chart
junk memorability issue?
Where as Tufte argued that the duck
junk is distracting and misleading,
the study by Bateman et al showed that it
can make visualizations more memorable.
Is this disconnect an issue of
beauty in information graphics?
Here's one parting thought
on beauty in information
that perhaps drives home this quality.
One of the most popular tech magazines,
well known for
it's full page information graphic
spreads is Wired Magazine.
On Wired's website,
they tag these articles as info porn.
A reference to the visceral reaction
that they hope readers will view
when viewing the articles.
The fourth quality of
visualization from Cairo
is that information graphics
should be insightful.
They shouldn't just replicate
data in tables, but
they should draw the viewer in such that
the viewer has an aha or eureka moment.
I think about this largely
in the context of academic
papers where I do most of my work.
A common issue that novice writers have in
this area is the inclusion of a figure for
every piece of data they have.
This is really unnecessary and adds
bloat and contributes to reader fatigue.
But the right figure drives home
the results of a study quickly.
Scientific peer review is
common in my field, but
readers don't have the large amounts of
time that they need to do full reviews.
When flipping through a submitted paper,
the reviewer sees an image which jumps off
the page and gives them immediate insight.
This sets them up to understand
the more nuanced story
to be told throughout
the rest of the paper.
The final quality of
visualization which Cairo
proposes is information graphics
should be enlightening.
This is different than insightful.
In fact, Cairo argues that this quality
is composed of the previous four,
truthful, functional,
beautiful and insightful.
But he separates and then adds
a social responsibility dimension.
I don't think there's an obvious
answer to this question.
But without a doubt,
Cairo's Five Qualities of Great
Visualizations being truthful, functional,
beautiful, insightful, and
enlightening are well worth considering.
Cairo has more great work, and
following this lecture I have
assigned a reading of his as well as
a discussion question to encourage
you to weigh in on the immorality of
information visualization as
it relates to data science.
And this ends the week of the course.
We've covered a lot of
material very quickly.
But I really do believe that these
two authors Alberto Ciro and
Edward Tufty are fundamental in
building a strong foundation for
the applied data science skills, we'll
focus on in the second week of the course.